# Beyond Single Embeddings: Capturing Diverse Targets with Multi-Query Retrieval

## Outline
This repository contains the code for the paper "Beyond Single Embeddings: Capturing Diverse Targets with Multi-Query Retrieval".  
This repo consist of three main portions: 
1. How to [create data for training](#data-creation)
2. How to [train the models](#training)
3. How to [do evaluation](#evaluation)

## Data Creation
### Prerequisite
You need to download data from [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1nIVLicTyZhcEoPVsvbpuIpVOTcbK2zhN/view?usp=sharing). 
Please place the data in this directory, and run
```
tar -zxvf data.tar.gz
```
The data will be saved to `amer_data/`. 


You should also download the data from [QAMPARI Website](https://samsam3232.github.io/qampari/).  
or simply run 
```
wget https://aggreg-qa.s3.amazonaws.com/chunked_wikipedia.tar.gz`.  
```
After downloading the data, move it to your desired directory.  
`cd` to that directory, and then run `tar -zxvf chunked_wikipedia.tar.gz`. (Decompress the chunked corpus)  

### Data Generation Procedure for Real Data 
First of all, change [path/to/chunks] in `bash create_data.sh` to the directory where you saved the chunked corpus `chunked_wikipedia.tar.gz`.  

Then run the below command to generate the data.  
```
bash create_data.sh
```

The script `bash create_data.sh` performs three steps: 
1. Corpus Creation: It runs `process_chunks.py` to combine the `*.jsonl` files into a single `.tsv` file. 
2. Generate Embeddings: It runs `generate_embeddings.py` to save the raw embeddings to `raw_data/`. 
3. Create Datasets: It creates actual datasets to be read by the script using `create_input_data.py`. 

The second step could take longer, depending on the machine you use. 

The generated data will be saved in `training_datasets/[base_model_name]/[data_name]/[document_encoder_name]/`. The scripts will iterate over two datasets (`qampari` and `ambigqa`), and four models (`Llama-1B`, `Llama-3B`, `Qwen3-4B`, and `Llama-8B`). 
Currently the script only supports generating document embeddings with [infly/inf-retriever-v1-1.5b](https://huggingface.co/infly/inf-retriever-v1-1.5b).  

#### Custom Models
You could add new document encoder models by modifying `generate_embeddings.py`, and add how you load the models in `load_model()` and how you processing documents in `embed_passages()`.  

To add a new LM for query encoder, you should modify the `create_input_embeddings_for_contrastive()` function in `create_input_dataset.py`. You should specify the model name, and how the response templates are formatted, following the existing format. For example, for the `Qwen-3` models, it looks like this: 
```
    elif model_name == "Qwen/Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507":
        instruction_template = "<|im_start|>user\n"
        response_template = "<|im_end|>\n<|im_start|>assistant\n"
```

### Data Generation Procedure for Synthetic Data 
Simply run the following command to generate the synthetic data: 
```
bash create_syn_data.sh
```

The data will be saved in `data_creation/gaussian/data`, with six configurations / subsets in total. There are two transformation type (Linear, MLP), and three query distribution type (single-in-distribution, multi-in-distribution, ood). 

For more details, refer to `data_creation/gaussian/` folder, where there is a clearer `README.md`. 


### Data Format
##### Data Format for Training 
{
    `"input_ids"`: the input indices (of the query) tokenized by the LM (query encoder) tokenizer,  
    `"attention_mask"`: mask indicating which tokens are used,  
    `"positive_embeddings"`: The embeddings of positive documents. Size: (length, dim),  
    `"negative_embeddings"`: The embeddings of negative documents. Size: (length, dim),  
}

##### Data Format for Generation
Use `input_ids`. 


### Folder Structure for Data 
- `amer_data/`: contains the original data structure of different datasets. 
    - `eval_data/`: saves the evaluation data.
- `training_datasets/`: training sets 
    - structure: [base_model]/[dataset]/[retriever]/[actual_dataset]
- `data_creation/raw_data/`: 
    - `[dataset]_[split]_question_only.jsonl`: the JSONL files that contain only the questions, for generating the data. Generated by `generate_embeddings.py`, and used by `create_input_dataset.py`. 
    - `[dataset]_[retriever]/`: the `.npy` files for embeddings of the positive / random negative documents. 
- `data_creation/gaussian/`: contains the code needed for generating gaussian data. 




## Training 
The training is done using LoRA. We train the model using either a single GPU or multiple GPUs in order to use a larger batch size. The script is written using `pytorch / huggingface / accelerate` packages.

### Run Training 
We support either single-GPU or multi-GPU training. We adopt a uniform data format, so that the training script is shared by synthetic and real data.  
You simply specify the correct path to training data you have generated from previous sections to use synthetic or real data.  

An example script can be found in `scripts/single_run.sh`.   
Important options needed to be overwritten: 
- `EXP_NAME`: the experiment identifier for whatever tracking package you use.
- `BASE_PROJECT`: project name to be used in tracking package. 
- `BASE_SAVE_PATH`: the directory for saving this run.
- `BASE_TRAIN_PATH`: the directory to the training data. The location should be the output of [This Section](#data-generation-procedure-for-real-data). 
- `MODEL_ID`: Model ID to be finetuned (e.g. "meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct").

Other important options to be modified: 
- `LOG_WITH`: whether to log with `wandb` or `trackio`, default to be `wandb`. 
- `full_finetuning`: whether to do full fine-tuning or LoRA.
- `multiple_gpus`: whether to use multiple GPUs. If true, we use the accelerate package.
- `MODE`: whether it's single-query or multi-query. Multi-query can be paired with scheduled sampling or always sampling (from previously predicted output). 
- `MODEL_TYPE`: Use "EmbeddingModelSSVariableLeftPad" for real data (AmbigQA / QAMPARI), and "EmbeddingModel" for synthetic data.

Hyperparameters are listed at the top of `scripts/single_run.sh`. These are the default values we use to train on the QAMPARI data.  
The full configurations and their descriptions can be found in `src/option.py`. 

After you have modified the script according to your liking, simply run 
```
bash scripts/single_run.sh 
```
to run an experiment. 

#### Single-GPU
Run command `python train.py`. Please refer to `train.py` for implementation details.  
#### Multi-GPU
With multiple-GPU training, the script is written using the `accelerate` package. Please refer to `train_distributed.py` for implementation details.  


### Custom Dataset
Modify `dataset.py` to include new data collators that could process different types of data.  
`dataset.py` also contains some useful processing functions.  

### Models 
`model.py` contains the definition of the embedding model, and the loading logic of the model.  
It also contains different loss functions, including `ContrastiveLoss`, and `HungarianContrastiveLoss`.  
The `EmbeddingModel` class includes three submodules: `base_causallm` (the base casaul langauge model), `input_projection` (the projection matrix that maps the embeddings to base LMs' embeddings space), and `output_projection` (the projection matrix that maps the LMs' prediction into retrievers' embedding space).  
Call the `.forward()` function to do training, and call the `.generate()` function for prediction.  




## Evaluation 
### Evaluation for Real Data

#### Document Embeddings Generation
First of all, you have to generate embeddings for the corpus. If you have not created the corpus yet, please follow instructions [here](#data-generation-procedure-for-real-data) to do so.  
Once you have created the corpus, run the following command to generate embeddings for the entire corpus using the document encoder you desire. The script `generate_embeddings.py` is implemented using `sentence_transformers`, so it should compatible with most huggingface models. Please specify the `[passages_path]` to be the corpus path you have created, and `[output_dir]` to be the desired location of the output embedddings. 
```
python generate_embeddings.py \
    --model_name_or_path [document_encoder_id] \
    --passages [passages_path]  \
    --output_dir [output_dir] \
    --per_gpu_batch_size 8 \
    --shard_id [shard_id] \
    --shard_size 500000
``` 
Since the corpus is quite large, you most likely have to break it down to smaller shards, so when you later load the passages you won't suffer from OOM issues. There are around 25M passages in total, so you could adjust the total number of shards if you use different shard sizes. Also note this script only generate passages for the specified shard (`[shard_id]`). If you are submitting jobs to a SLURM cluster, you could speed it up by running array jobs.  

An example script can also be found in `scripts/generate_embeddings.sh`. 

#### Run Retrieval 
Run `gen_ret_and_eval.py` to generate the query vectors and retrieve documents using the query vectors.  
See `scripts/run_retrieval.sh` for an example to run the retrieval.  

Important arguments: 
- `dev_data_path`: The file contains the questions in raw text. You should be able to find the files for QAMPARI and AmbigQA in `amer_data/eval_data/[dataset].jsonl`, if you follow the steps [here](#prerequisite) and download the data. 
- `output_path`: The output path saving the retrieval results. 
- `base_model_id`: The base model path. If you do LoRA training, this should be the base model you start with (e.g. `meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct`). If you do full fine-tuning, this should be the path where you save the trained models. 
- `adapter_path`: If you do LoRA training, this should be the path where you save the trained models. If you do full fine-tuning, this should be `None`. 
- `linear_checkpoint_path`: This should be the path where you save the linear layers. 
- `base_model_type`: What type of base model you are using. Currently supporting [`llama-1b`, `llama-3b`, `qwen3-4b`, `llama-8b`]. If you would like to add new base models, please modify the `get_instruction()` function in `gen_ret_and_eval.py` and add the response templates for your selected model. 
- `num_shards`: If you load the passage indices to a CPU, then it could just be `1`. However, if you're loading the indices to GPU and you don't have a lot of memory, you should consider using a larger number of shards. The script will retrieve from only the passages in each shard and aggregate them later. 
- `max_new_tokens`: The number of query embeddings to be generated. 
- `top_k_per_query`: Number of retrieval results for each generated query.
- `top_k`: Number of retrieval results after we combine results from all the queries. 
            

#### Evaluate Against Ground Truth
Then run `eval.py` to evaluate the performances of the generated document set. An example script:  
```
python eval.py --data_path [data_path] \
               --input-file [input_file]  \
               --topk 100 
```
You should specify the ground truth data in `[data_path]` and the retrieval result in `[input_file]`. The `topk` can be specified to be a list, e.g. `--topk 500 100 50 10`. 


See `scripts/eval.sh` for an example.  



### Evaluation for Synthetic Data
Use `test.py`. The script runs both retrieval and evaluation at once.  
There is an example script in `scripts/eval/test_gaussian.sh`.  

Important options to specify: 
- `model_paths`: The path where you store the trained checkpoints, containing both the base model weights and linear layer weights. It should the `BASE_SAVE_PATH` you specify in `scripts/single_run.sh`. You could specify multiple folder paths in this argument by simply appending more paths. 
- `raw_data_dir`: The path where you store the raw generated data. If you follow the above instructions, it should be in `data_creation/gaussian/data/{type}`, where `type`=[`linear`, `linear_multi_query`, `linear_ood`, `mlps`, `mlps_multi_query`, `mlps_ood`].  
- `embedding_data_dir`: The path where you store the datasets saved as input for training or evaluation. If you follow the above instructions, it should be `synthetic_datasets/synthetic_{type}_test/`, where `type`=[`linear`, `linear_multi_query`, `linear_ood`, `mlps`, `mlps_multi_query`, `mlps_ood`].
- `checkpoint_name`: The checkpoint name with the best validation score. If you save only the best model, it should be `best_model`. 


## Codebase Structure
### Main Files
- `train.py`: single-GPU training
- `train_distributed.py`: multi-GPU training
- `test.py`: evaluate results on synthetic data.
- `gen_ret_and_eval.py`: run retrieval using fine-tuned retrievers for real data.
- `eval.py`: evaluate retrieval outputs against ground truth data for real data.

### Folders
- `analysis`: analysis source files.
- `baselines`: implementation of baselines. 
- `data_creation`: source code for re-creating the data.
- `scripts`: example scripts. 
- `src`: source code. 
- `src_plots`: source code for generating the plots in the paper.

### Misc. 
- `dist_utils.py`: contains functions that handle multiple-GPU training. 
- `eval_utils.py`: contains functions that help the evaluation. 
- `retrieval_utils.py`: contains classes / functions that helps the retrieval (e.g. Indexer).
- `utils.py`: learning rate scheduler, optimizer, etc. 

### Scripts Available
They are under the `scripts/` folder.
- `scripts/single_run.sh` help runs script in an interactive environment.  
- `scripts/run_retrieval.sh` runs retrieval for real data. 
- `scripts/eval/test_gaussian.sh` help runs eval for the Gaussian Synthetic data.  
- `scripts/eval/eval_example.sh` help runs normal eval.  
